[Michael]
Before I embarked on
my journey to Japan,
to learn about the Cognitive
Tradeoff hypothesis,
I first visited
Dr. Terrence Deacon,
professor of neuroanthropology
at UC Berkeley.
to learn about the hardware
on which language had to be
installed: the brain.
[Deacon] So, these
are all preserved brains
in formaldehyde.
You know what I love
about this room?
One is that
you've got a cabinet
full of giant buckets that
just have your name on them,
and they don't look like
they contain nice stuff.
But also this fridge--
"BIOHAZARD."
-That's not where
you keep your lunch.
-That's right.
-This is not a place
where people get to eat.
-Right.
This is just a human brain,
preserved and then wrapped up
in Saran Wrap,
like a leftover.
You clearly didn't just
grab this from someone.
No, that's right. Today human
brains are highly protected,
and lots of paperwork
is required.
They're available,
but it takes a lot
of careful tracking...
-Do you have to like report on,
"Yep, I still have it. Hasn't
been stolen..."
-Yep, exactly.
Who is it?
- I do know that
this is from a male.
-Okay.
I believe this
is an 80-year-old,
but roughly in that range.
Let's move on to this brain.
So, this is a bonobo,
close relative to chimpanzees.
No kidding.
They look really similar.
In biological terms,
humans are just another
African ape.
In cognitive terms,
we're like a whole
other phylum of animals.
So, I mean, where are
these physical differences
that make us--
-Right.
-I mean, maybe we're not
that different, really.
So, in one respect,
none of these brains
have parts that others lack,
including the human brain.
There's no special part
in the human brain
to do any of the things
that make us special.
And that's, again,
because of the incredibly
conservative nature
of how brains have evolved.
Why don't I just pick one
of the primate brains,
and the human brain,
and we'll just compare
different brains.
There's something that feels
very strange about knowing
that this...belonged
to a person.
I mean, the ape, it's very--
It's amazing how different
that feels.
-I tell people
to respect this.
-Yes.
But also this one.
All of these were living,
feeling, experiencing beings.
Okay, so let's look at these
and show me,
is there a place in the brain
where there's a lot of
language going on?
What we do know about language
is that most of the brain
is actually involved
in some aspect of it.
-Yeah.
-You really need the whole
working cerebral cortex
to do what you and I do now.
Let's take a look at
the non-human primate brain.
It's laid out
pretty much the same way.
Look at that.
But there's still so similar,
not just in physical shape,
but even the responsibilities
or roles that
the different places play.
Not only that, some of
my early work was able to show
that the connectivity
of these structures
between each other
is the same.
-Wow.
-Or very, very similar.
Obviously, this is larger,
-Yeah.
-but the basic pattern
of connections is the same.
[Michael] What do you think
of the Cognitive Tradeoff
hypothesis?
So, first of all,
the systems that do memory
in our brain
are not fundamentally
different in their structure
and their circuitry and so on.
-Yeah.
-I think in the absence
of language, we would
-probably be like chimpanzees,
gorillas, orangutans, and so on.
-Right.
But yet, they're able
to perform really well
at tasks
that seem to look like,
"Did they take a picture
or something?"
Exactly. Chimpanzees
seem to do reasonably well
at some of these tasks.
But we've traded off
that ability in order
to focus on language.
Because the memory systems
we use in language
interface with each other
in a way that's unusual.
Let me give you an example.
Every book on my shelves,
no two sentences, probably,
alike in any of these books.
An immense amount of detail!
And, having read a good part
of almost all these books,
I couldn't tell you
any of these sentences.
-No.
-But if you ask me
what's in this book,
what's its main ideas,
I can probably give it to you.
-That's a remarkable capacity.
-Yeah.
So what I'm suggesting as
the tradeoff is sort of giving
up the specific details--
to sacrifice it at one level
gives it back to us
at another level.
That's the power
that we have gained from this.
Because of that power,
we can get at information that
no other species can get at,
both in our own experience,
and in describing things
in the world.